---
layout: layout
title: Will the EU collapse?
---

The reason is that basically no-one actually thinks the EU, as
currently constituted, is in any way a good idea. Whether one says
this publicly is a matter of how one wishes to be perceived. In the
UK, support for the EU is basically a way of signalling that one is
against nationalism, facism, racism, traditionalism, various forms of
conservatism, etc. Opposition to the EU has often been *perceived to
have been* dominated by undesirable types, and certainly the UK's only
substantial racist party is highly Eurosceptic (except inasmuch as it
sees the EU as an instrument for encouraging immigration by white
people).

The common perception of Euroscepticism is wrong, like so many common
perceptions.

So: there was no-one to have my argument with. The most committed
Europhiles basically privately admit the entire thing is a catastrophe
and work diligently for its reform.

My 11 points in that article fall into three categories: the absence
of most features of Europe-level democracy (in the last five years I
have formalised this into testable questions), the misdesign and
misbehaviour of actors (legislators, officials, judges) in the
European lawmaking processes, and the undesirable effects this all has
on policy outcomes.

So as Abraham Lincoln didn't ask, can a government neither of the
people, nor by the people, nor for the people, long endure?

I see no reason to believe that it could. Either democracy will come
to the EU, and so radically transform it as it no longer retain any
meaningful identity with the constitutional structures we see today,
or countries will vote to withdraw.

The effect of the undemocratic operation of the EU is to transfer
resources and power to people who would not otherwise receive them. It
is irrational for any group of people to tolerate this
indefinitely. Ireland didn't tolerate being governed from London in
1920, and I suppose the current rule from further east will be equally
unwelcome. Most countries formerly controlled by the UK obtained their
independence peacefully, and if independence is good enough for
Canada, for Nigeria, for India and the rest, why is independence not
good enough for the UK?

I expect it will be the Germans whose patience snaps first though.



