---
layout: layout
title: Consent and Legitimacy
---

The problem is that the existing EU constitutional structure is not
one which the electorates of the Member States would all have entered
into willingly. This is for a number of reasons: outside the context
of accession terms, most electorates have never had a chance to vote
on the EU/EC/EEC constitutional structures.

There has been, I think, one single election in a Member State, where
people have had a serious direct choice about European integration,
and that was the Maltese general election which settled the
inconclusive referendum they’d just tried to hold on EU accession. In
the generality if not totality of other cases, integration has been an
issue but as part of a broader manifesto for a doomed party and would
not have been the determinant of many people’s votes: e.g., the Labour
manifesto of 1983 in the UK, or the Tories in 2001. Non-mainstream
minor or extremist / terrorist-front parties can’t really count here.

Once your State is a Member, which may not have happened by contested
election or referendum, you basically don’t get a choice on
constitutional matters, unless you’re from one of a very small number
of Member States: Ireland and Denmark frequently consult the
electorate on constitutional changes, and there have been two
referendums in France, and one each in the UK, Netherlands, Sweden,
Luxembourg and Spain.

Belgium, Portugal, Italy (which had a referendum on a non-live issue,
once), Germany and Greece have basically never let the voters near the
question, and Finland, Austria and the port 2004 accession countries
have only had accession referendums (arguably the UK should number
with these).

The absence of basic democratic scrutiny and formal consent for the
evolving EU constitution has meant that it contains provisions which
no-one would ever have voted for. Because it is believed to be
necessary for some policies to be hardwired into a constitution as a
prerequisite for the electorate agreeing to bound by it (an event
which has never happened in the UK), an EU statutory constitution may
not be possible with the democratic consent of all Member States, as
some will want free trade and others will want a constitutional
guarantee aganist free trade, or abortion, or the proper labelling of
fatal poisons or whatever happens to rouse the passions.

We are at a position where there is a Europhile majority in all Member
State legislatures, yet a Eurosceptic majority in some Member State
electorates, who are on most other issues properly represented. It
seems unlikely that European integration can proceed from now on on
the basis of defiance of the electorate by national legislators or the
Luxembourg Court, having legal rather than political/moral legitimacy.

The greater problem is that legally, everyone is locked in to the
existing structure. It can only be changed unanimously, and the
various Member States’ electorates want to pull in opposite
directions. Either the benefits of legal continuity and certainty must
be abandoned, or must those of democracy.

Those who erected the legal edifice without sufficient democratic
consultation are to blame.
