---
layout: layout
title: Defining Federalism
---

More federalism in Jon’s argument seems to be the premise rather than
the conclusion, but he also doesn’t define what he means by it.

I can see at least three senses of federalism:

1) favouring more power for the federal government as against the
states; contrast “states rights”

2) favouring a de facto and de jure separation of competences between
federation and states, such that the one may not unilaterally revoke
the powers of the other; contrast “unitary government”

3) favouring the aggregation of states into large states

I think Jon is promoting federalism in senses 1) and 3)

The problem is sense 2), federalism as against unitary
government. Inherently, this sort of federalism implies an enforceable
limitation on government power: you have to be able to go to the
courts and have legislation declared invalid on grounds that it was
enacted at the wrong level of government. And *that* implies that
courts have a power to declare legislation invalid at all.

The UK, France, and the EU do not, in practice, have courts which
behave like this. Has any citizen *ever* had an EU directive declared
outside the power of the EU, by the ECJ? The absence of ex post review
of legislation in the French and UK traditions has prevented the
development of federal systems in those polities, and in any polities
which adopted their traditions, such as the EU. The American practice
of ex post review, dating to 1803, has allowed the entrenchment of
federal vs state powers in the USA, and been copied in Canada,
Australia etc. Germany is more similar to the American rather than
Anglo-French tradition in this respect.

So, the EU is a unitary rather than federal polity: the ECJ doesn’t in
practice practise ex post review, and MEPs hold the idea of exclusive
member state competences in open contempt. The contrast with America
is again striking: American conservatives have no trouble opposing
federal gay marriage bans on states rights grounds.

So. The constructors of the EU have brought about a situation where
there *can* be no enforceable division of competences between the
federal and member state governments. An extremist minority persists
in attempting further *deliberate* transfers of competences to federal
level, and nothing can stop them.

We should now turn to the Moravcsik fallacy, i.e., that the sorts of
powers exercised by the EU are of a type which *should* not be
exercised democratically. Classic examples are the ECB and the
Commission’s anti-trust enforcement operation. If all the EU’s
competences are of this sort, then the democratic deficit is not just
non-existent, it is actually desirable.

Of course, it’s also an argument for abolishing pretty much all EU
competences *other* than the ones which ought not to be exercised
democratically.

Moravcsik’s approach is useful: the adequacy of the EU’s democratic
mechanisms should be considered on a competence-by-competence
basis. What he doesn’t say is that the EU’s record, when considered
this way, is pathetic and embarrassing. The radically unitary
character of the EU’s allocation of competences means that the record
will deteriorate over time and further delegitimise the polity.

Well done, guys.

