---
layout: layout
title: EU Federalism
---

This article is a work in progress. It has no structure yet. It
dissolves into note form at the end. Please check back later for a
complete version. Variations in terminology between EU, EC and EEC are
deliberate but of marginal importance.

The European Union's particular model of European integration is not
by any means the only one possible. In an ideal world, I would prefer
a federal Europe, but whether or not that were possible, I would
abolish the EU and start again from scratch. The EU is criticised by
the right wing in the United Kingdom; much as I share their objectives
of loosening the UK's ties to the EU, I cannot agree with their naïve
assertion that the EU is becoming a federal superstate, or their
arguments from sovereignty. ( include here introductions to the other
paragraphs )

The EU is often characterised as an embryonic "federal superstate". It
is no such thing, at least by any conventional definition of
federalism or any reasonable comparison with federal states elsewhere
in the world. Federal entities typically have a well-defined division
between the responsibilities of the federation and its member states,
and the responsibilities for external relations, defence and the bulk
of general taxation tend to lie at the federal, rather than state,
level. In these terms, the EU/EC is almost the diametric opposite of a
federation: there is no effective division of responsibilities, and
foreign affairs and tax are handled at the state level. The real
legislative power in the EC is also held by the member state
governments acting together, rather than by some sort of "European
government". If the EU is a federation, it is upside-down.

The other Eurosceptic argument is the one from sovereignty: the EU
undermine's the UK's sovereignty or independence and is therefore
automatically a bad thing. Fair enough, if sovereignty is a wholly
good thing, which it isn't necessarily. Ultimately I just don't think
that national sovereignty is of paramount importance, certainly not of
the importance in which it is impliedly held by the proponents of this
argument. The converse position, which holds that globalisation makes
sovereignty irrelevant, is just as logically flawed as an argument for
EU membership. No, it is a different aspect of self-government which
should be the focus of the argument: democracy.

Democracy is where the EU/EC is particularly weak. Fundamentally,
there is no "people" whose collective will the EU institutions can (be
said to) express. If there is a polity represented by the EU
institutions, it is merely the collectivity of officials and
politicians of the Commission and member states. There is no
pan-European media. There is no way for European citizens to influence
decision-making by the Commission, Parliament or Council. European
Parliamentary elections are fought on national issues, and in most
cases the electoral system does not permit the easy removal of
individual parliamentarians, which significantly reduces their
responsiveness to constituents. Increasing the powers of the European
Parliament will not make the EU substantially more democratic. Being
more distant, both geographically and politically, from their
constituents makes the European Parliamentarians more susceptible to
lobbying than Bnational politicians.

Of course, some lobbying is in the public interest. National
parliaments have a much longer tradition of democracy (indeed in
Britain, Ireland and Sweden this tradition is unbroken in living
memory), and NGOs have established themselves with close links to
these bodies; no such tradition of close civil society links exists in
respect of the European Parliament or Commission, and the barriers to
their establishment are much higher.

European directives (blueprint laws saying what member states laws
should provide) are the main species of European legislation. The
legislative activity is undertaken by threee institutions: the
Commission, the Parliament and the Council. Nothing passes except by
permission of the Council, which contains representatives of the
governments of the member states, not their parliaments. Parliamentary
control of executive foreign/external policy-making is often an area
of weakness, but the rôle of member state governments in the Council
is a new extreme. The outcome of European legislative processes is
regarded as outside the scope of domestic political contestability; by
making an issue a matter of treaty obligation, European member state
governments may, when acting collectively, reduce the scope of
permitted domestic political activity. Anyone wishing to challenge
European policy outcomes must resort to the nuclear option of
breaching the European treaties by non-compliance or withdrawal. The
effect of the institutional arrangement is that legislative power is
transferred to the executive of member states, and democratic scrutiny
is reduced.

harmonisation

Democracy is more than a set of properties of avoting system - as a
philosophy of governance it also incorporates notions of transparency
and accountability. The European Council fails badly on transparency -
much of its business is conducted in secret. It is not unique as a
legislative body in sitting in secret - apparently this is done in
North Korea as well.

normative legitimacy

If the benefit of membership of the EC is liberalised access to
markets, why should the UK remain a member if the WTO achieves
comparable results on a global scale? Why indeed should the EC
continue to exist? The initial question perhaps presupposes a false
premise, that benefits of membership are exclusively economic. A
striking difference between the EU and WTO régimes is that the EU has
an active social policy. The EU and and its predecessors make some
effort to compensate the losers in the liberalisation/globalisation
game. The original ECSC compensated the employees of inefficient pits
closed due to integration, with training and relocation grants, and
the principle has remained that the EU will attempt to regulate the
capital flows unleashed by liberalisation. For better or worse, EC
social policy now encompasses consumer and employee protection, all on
the rationale of the harmonisation necessary for liberalisation of
market access. The WTO does no such thing. It should be noted that EC
social spending was from the 1970s explicitly intended as a panem et
circenses method of winning public support.

Moreover, the EU actually works in terms of its stated procedures. The
EU has rules, and the rules are to a great extent followed. This is
not to say that the EU is a haven of rule-abidingness remotely
approaching the levels of reliability and predictability which obtain
in the Anglosphere, but it does have enforcement procedures which
people expect to work. The structure of WTO negotiations do not permit
all affected parties sufficient voice or influence, and the
enforcement of WTO rules is skewed towards interests in the United
States, the most egregious recent example being the labelling of cheap
Vietnamese imports as dumping.

EuropeanLaw?

what directives really do

shared tradition of culture, but not economics and governance /
cultural genocide

inability to confine itself to purpose / constantly moving target /
teleology

Unlike well-functioning federal polities, the EC has no working
demarcation between federal and state competences. EC law is held (by
the EC institutions) to take precedence over the law of the member
states. In theory, however, EC law is limited in its "sphere of
competence" - it should only cover commercial policy, trade, tarriffs,
free movement of persons and so on. In practice the notion of "spheres
of competence" has no limiting effect on the scope of EC law, which
spills out over national law as a result of the aforementioned
supremacy of EC law over conflicting national provisions. This did not
matter for the first few decades of the EEC's existence, until 1986,
because member state governments had an effective veto on all EC
legislation, so its relationship with national law was much less
problematic.

mechanisms transfer power from parliaments to national governments

decisions are not reviewable, often on logically inconsistent grounds

the Directive is not reviewable because it is addressed to the Member
State; the MS implementation of the Directive is not reviewable
insofar as it is necessary for MS compliance with the Directive
(that's from the POV of an individual through the Courts)

MS legislators are in the same boat - the policy embodied in the
Directive cannot be reviewd once passed, yet no attempt is made to
restrain ministerial discretion in the Council

prior national legislative restraint on EC reps would completely
change EC governance

In some EU Member States, citizens may so distrust their national
political (or judicial) institutions that the EU institutions may
appear to constitute a preferable alternative. This is a view born of
ignorance or prejudice - an alternative need not always be better than
something which is bad

Articulating the view that national institutions, in general, or those
of a particular member State, are better than EU ones is hampered by
the fac tthat many of the MSes are nations, and nations have a bad
name. Delcaring the superioritry of some national instuttion is too
easily conflated with declaring the superiority of some racial, ethnic
or cultural identity. In federaionts such as the US, Germany or
Australia, supporting teh states (as against teh federation) is at
worst a form of parochialism, and is never a coded call for organised
mass murder.

The EP is a weak player in the European scene. Euroboosters point to
it as a demonstration of the supposed democratic nature of the
EU. Doubtless they did not bother trying to do so before the EP was
popularly elected body, but claims that some democratic element is
situated in the EP are largely false, at least insofar as "democratic"
is not coterminous with "elected".

    EP elections not fought on EU issues low turnout outcomes of
    elections don't matter unrepresentative on EU constitutional
    issues no pan-EU media no pan-EU polity / political consciousness

EP more susceptible to lobbying than national parliaments. Remoteness
and diffuseness favour concentrated interests even more than national
parliaments.

The idea behind a federal system of government is that a division be
maintained between two different "levels" of government. This division
is normally a substantive one - which policy are federal, which one
state - rather than a procedural one (you can only tax up to such and
such a level, or have such an such a criminal penalty if you do it at
the state level).

I'm going to take it for granted that federalism is an end in itself -
that we should prefer the outcomes of a governmental system with an
in-built dividsion of responsibilities - though I believe that it is
possible to justify a preference for federalism over unitary
ogvernment in utilitarian terms.

It is generally the case that in functioning federal systems, the
following statements are all true:

    the constituent states are geographical units almost all the
    population lives in one or other of the States - geographical
    territory within the F but outside the States has only limited
    population the reallocation of powers as between the F and the
    States may only be effected with the consent of both. (there are
    lots of States, so generally some supermajority thereof suffices)
    the boundary between F and S power is policed by politicians and
    the Courts. It is a mark of a well-functioning federal system that
    mainstream politicians pronounce themselves opposed to policies
    they would otherwise support on the strength of federalism alone

Witness Governor Schwarzenegger's recent declaration of his opposition
to a federal ban on gay marriage on the grounds that such a ban should
be underatekn at the State level. The position of the American
conservatives goes even further: a federal ban on gay marriage is not
only unconstitutional, but America should not amend its Constitution
to alter that fact.

The contrasts with the European political system is instructive and
shocking: the generality - let alone the mainstream - of MEPs believe
the federal / state boundary should be moved in favour of the federal,
or should be abolished entirely. Some commentators go so far as to
accuse MEPs of choosing policies on the basis of their expected effect
on the F/S boundary, rather than on their individual merits.

To the extent that their opinions differ from the public at large on
the question of F/S competences, the MEPs are unrepresentative of
their constituents, which detracts from their democratic
legitimacy. More subtly, it calls into question the processes which
led to the "representation" of the public by people who disagree with
them so sharply on a fundamental constitutional issue.

It is sometimes asserted that the EP constitutes some sort of
democratic check on the EU legislative process (or executive). It
can't introduce or repeal the law it (sometimes) has a rôle in
"passing"; moreover, in practice it doesn't vote laws down, only
amends them.

Analysing the changes in the division of responsibilities between F
and S is to concentrate on only one relation in a two-dimensional
system. The other critical relation is that between national
governments and national parliaments. Participation in the European
system drastically alters the balance struck [here], in favour of
governments. Directives adopted by the Council of Ministers are
effectively binding on national legislatures. Any powers which can be
transferred to the Council thus

The logic of harmonisation

