---
layout: layout
title: Get the EU
---

A site dedicated to helping the ordinary citizen get the EU. We're
dedicated to public understanding and explanation.

The site is intended as a collection of arguments mainly against the
EU, but giving credit where credit is due where the EU is doing a good
job.

What's wrong with the EU? Read on ...

No demos
--------

There does not exist a single group of people in respect of whom the
EU could be a democracy.

No mandate
----------

Even if there were or is a European demos, what is done by the
Commission is not in response to any expressed or felt need of the
citizens. In normal democratic politics you have occasional elections,
during which time certain issues are publicly discussed. Whoever wins
power has some justification for carrying out whatever programme they
were proposing while trying to get elected.

This just doesn't happen in the EU. The Commission isn't elected, and
the elected European Parliament does not have a mandate to do any
particular course of action. Unelected bodies should not have the
right to initiate legislation. So either the Commission should be
elected, or it should be deprived of any right to initiate
legislation.

Separation of powers
--------------------

The Council of Ministers must assent to legislation, like the second
chamber of many legislatures. It comprises representatives of the
executive branch of each member state government. This provides those
governments with a means of bypassing their respective parliaments,
which often constitute the primary day-to-day democratic check on
their activities.

Over time, it motivates governments to hand more powers from national
parliaments to the EU, and suborns national political parties into
supporting the EU if they have a reasonable chance to form the
executive.

Contemporaneity
---------------

EC legislation is not sufficiently contemporaneous in its passage. It
is simply bad governance to allow a legislative process to span long
periods of time, and the UK Parliament at least limits the amount of
time which may elapse between the initiation of a legislative measure
and its conclusion.

In the EU, the Commission may wait years for an opportunity to put
some pet project through the legislative machine; it's not possible
for citizens opposing the legislation ever to be sure they've won.

Accounts
--------

The EU's accounts notoriously never get signed off. Member States
ought simply to block the provision of new money until this
happens. This is basic good governance. Because the system forces
taxpayers to hand over cash even when there's no guarantee it's being
spent properly, there's no discipline: money will and does get
misspent. If misspending money had negative consequences, it would
stop.

Transparency
------------

Whereas many people accused of error will retaliate illegally and
immorally at their accusers, the EU has the exacerbating factor of
paranoia about Euroscepticism. I don't have good evidence on this
point yet, but my impression is that fears of exposure of one scandal
or another motivate even more secrecy and vituperation from the EU's
bureaucracy than would happen otherwise.

I can't find out what happened in the Hans-Martin Tillack case, but it
seems the EU Commission got the Belgian police to arrest him and hand
over his notes, revealing who the whistleblowers were, and that
Belgian law differs from that of other EU countries in allowing the
&#8220;authorities&#8221; (and it should be noted that the EU
Commission is not part of the Belgian state) to get away with this,
calling into serious question the appropriateness of locating so many
EU institutions in that country.

Money
-----

If a government needs tax money to survive (and in the present day,
this is effectively true around the world), and cannot on its own
authority raise this tax, then it will become beholden to whoever or
whatever does possess this authority (Parliament, in the case of
Westminster-style polities). Parliament has the power it does because
it can bankrupt the UK government if it doesn't get its way: a
majority in the House of Commons which disagrees with this policy,
that appointment or yonder exercise of ministerial authority can
simply threaten not to pass the next Budget. The need for periodic
tax-raising and the requirement for renewed elections keeps the system
accountable to the public. Effectively, the tax-raising is on an
annual basis, so on average the Government ought to be able to survive
six months. (In practice I'm not sure what would happen if the
Government lost its majority with many months to go before the next
Budget vote.)

I don't understand the precise way the EU's budget works as a matter
of law, but it seems that Member States are obligated to hand over
money on a septennial basis; this strikes me as far too long-term a
grant of legal tax-raising authority. There's much less pressure to do
what citizens want if you can legally tax them for the next seven
years.

Platinum Plating
----------------

Gold-plating is the embellishment of EC legislation by national
bureaucracies. Sometimes this is necessary on account of the poor
quality of the original legislation. In other cases, measures
implementing EC legislation are not scrutinised as heavily as normal
legislation and may contain unjustified extensions; these extensions
are invalidly waved through under the fast-track procedures, and then
defended as though they were part of the EC measure as a whole.

Platinum plating is when gold-plating happens twice: unnecessary
additions *have* to be implemented in national law because they've
been added by EU legislators purportedly implementing some
international obligation.

As a general rule, national legislation should be used to implement
international rules, rather than having a three-stage process with the
EU in between. This insulates the public against an additional
opportunity for politicians and civil servants to pass off their pet
projects as legal obligations.

ECJ partiality
--------------

The Court of Justice of the European Communities (ECJ) has held itself
to be responsible for adjudicating disputes about the meaning of the
treaties. The treaties empower the Community (or, later, the Union) to
legislate in certain areas. The ECJ claims to have the final say on
whether a measure goes beyond what is allowed in the treaties, but
time after time after time, with a monotonity and regularity acquiring
an almost mathematical and aesthetic purity and wholeness, this Court
has decided in favour of the EU/EC/EEC against the Member State. In
the fifty-year history of the EU and its predecessors, there appears
to have been only one finding that a measure was *ultra vires* the
treaties (a directive about tobacco advertising opposed by Germany).

Non-existent civil society
--------------------------

Civil society barely exists at the European level. By civil society I
mean non-governmental, non-profit organisations (charities, political
groups, many sports clubs, churches, universities, trades unions,
business associations, foundations, institutes and so on), and mean to
exclude for-profit organisations such as for-profit companies,
cooperatives, and mutual societies, and all governmental institutions.

At the European level, most institutions corresponding to these sorts
of things are either state-funded, or don't exist. The best you can
get tends to be a Europe-wide confederation of national civil society
institutions. There are vanishingly few Europe-wide membership
organisations comprising individuals, and it is hard to set them up.

This is both a problem and a symptom.

There is no pan-European media
------------------------------

This is possibly the gravest of the problems, and one which is
difficult to remedy by state or private action.



