---
layout: layout
title: Legitimacy
---

You’re saying those on the left should really be talking about “what a
more social EU would actually look like”.

The legitimacy problem can’t be just brushed aside. For the left to
talk about achieving a “social EU” is for the left to talk about
*illegitimately* achieving its objectives.

This is basic democratic / constitutionalist potty training. Movements
should *not* go about asking “hmm, how can we get what we want without
doing it democratically?”

*Any* discussion of what the EU should do is a discussion of how to
 avoid proper democratic scrutiny of a policy, and so there should be
 no such discussion until the legitimacy issues are resolved.


------------

@Jon,

I think there’s a danger of talking past each other.

The GLA example is a good one: what is necessary for the GLA / Mayor
to be legitimate is not that the electorate feel that they’re
Londoners (I don’t – I’ve only lived here five years), but that the
generality of them are happy to abide by decisions of a London-wide
majority. This is testable by opinion polling.

If a polity lacks legitimacy in this sense, then people will start
opposing its constitutional setup as such, as well as decisions taken
under it. And they’d be right: there’s less of a moral reason to obey
the law (particularly a bad law) if it’s not democratically
legitimate.

There are lots of mechanisms for dealing with trans-border issues
affecting multiple polities: Benvenisti’s book “Sharing Transboundary
Resources” is excellent on the effects of institutional setups on
common resources such as lakes. The EU is only one set of such
mechanisms, and a bad and unjustifiable one at that.

It is not the case that the generality of people, in any EU country,
are happy to be bound by an EU-wide majority on almost any subject
(except possibly the Eurovision Song Contest, which would be much
better conducted by Europe-wide voting). It follows that much of what
the EU does is rightly going to be regarded as illegitimate. Changing
the institutions won’t change people’s opinions quickly or greatly.

---------------

Changing the powers of the elected institutions in the EU is not going
to confer democratic legitimacy.

What is needed is for there to be a rough consensus amongst the
generality of the population in each Member State, that they are
prepared to be bound by the decisions of an EU-wide majority in the
areas with which the EU concerns itself. The EU is hopelessly short of
this sort of legitimacy.

To argue that this *isn’t* necessary puts one on the opposite side
from Home Rule in 1918, and on the Tory side in the American
Revolution.

---------------

@Ralf Grahn, this claim about referendum genies and farewell
deliberative democracy, whatever it is, is just rhetoric, isn’t it?
Has deliberative democracy collapsed in Australia given the rate of
referendums at one every two and a half years since Federation? No of
course it hasn’t; the very idea is preposterous and offensive in its
disregard for the facts.

I don’t get this argument about tax harmonisation. Most EU competences
are acquired not by treaty change but by treaty violation ratified by
the Luxembourg Court, which has fewer than ten times (maybe fewer than
three) in fifty years decided that a particular matter was outside the
EU’s competence. Not only do the Irish have to worry about competence
creep and a partisan judiciary, but horse-trading. It’s no good for
tax harmonisation to require unanimity if the Irish Government can
make a deal in COREPER trading off Ireland’s veto for something else.

Ralf, you are just setting up a straw man. I mentioned the Australian
system. As you will know (and if you didn’ know, how dare you not
bother finding out before replying to my post?), amendments to the
Australian federal constitution take the form of a parliamentary act
amending the constitution which may only come into force if ratified
at referendum.

In this case, the “methods of representative democracy” are employed
in addition to the referendum, so their superiority or otherwise is
irrelevant. The referendum check prevents a temporary legislative
majority on a particular question being able to entrench its position
when it is unrepresentative of the electorate as a whole.

(There is a slight difference, inasmuch as constitutional amendment
bills don’t require the consent of both houses, but in practice this
is irrelevant – I think they go through both houses anyway)

Why should the argument that governments and parliaments learn from
their mistakes not apply also the electorate as a whole?

-------------

@Jon Again, good to see an intellectually honest approach to EU
matters from the Europhile camp. I’m a little concerned that your
position is one of “democracy isn’t working too well at Member State
level, so there’s no point fixing anything at EU level”, which
presumably isn’t what you meant to say. As it happens, I think
democracy is working pretty well in most member states (the notes are
somewhere on my blog), is feasibly fixable at member state level, but
that there’s no prospect of adequate democracy at EU level.

There’s a logically prior question about *what* ought to be decidable
democratically at EU level.

Is there much evidence that citizens want to be bound by EU-wide
majorities on particular policy issues, e.g., quantitative studies,
broken down by policy area or country?

If there’s no demand for trans-EU majoritarianism, increasing the
powers of political institutions which can impose trans-EU policies is
only going to decrease the extent to which government is by consent,
and government without consent is unsustainable. Indeed, Europe’s main
supranational state, the United Kingdom, fell apart in the 1920s as
most of Ireland did not consent to being governed from London. Never
let it be said that supranationalism prevents war ;)

@Nils You say a legitimate EU democracy requires a directly-elected
executive. That’s setting the bar pretty high, as most Member States
have indirectly elected executives – all the constitutional monarchies
have to, and there are great parliamentary republics such as Germany
and Italy. There’s more than one legitimate structural model. We do
not, *always*, have to copy the French and the Americans.

@Mary Subsidiarity is, in practice, non-existent. To have actually
existing subsidiarity, you need an enforcement mechanism. I think the
enforcement mechanism needs to be judicial. (The ability of Member
State legislatures to be able to block Directives on subsidiarity
grounds is really a mechanism for preventing those legislatures from
blocking Directives on non-subsidiarity grounds such as legality). The
ECJ in Luxembourg has proven, beyond any doubt whatsoever, that it
cannot be trusted to enforce subsidiarity. I think it’s a waste of
time; subsidiarity was basically just borrowed out of Catholic Social
Teaching to help get Maastricht past the nay-sayers, and has never
been taken seriously by the authorities.


@Eurocentric My comments about the UK / Ireland were not 100% serious
:) I am as aware as you of the historical circumstances driving Irish
nationalism (for many it was originally a means to the end of agrarian
and other reforms) in the C19, and don’t really dissent from your
rebuttal, except to say that the EU *does* suffer from problems
analogous to those the UK faced in the 1910s: the majority of the
population of the UK no longer accepts the constitutional position of
the terms of the UK’s membership of the EU.

I’m not sure I saw you cite any quantitive data about democratic
consent for EU-level majoritarian ordering of particular policy areas.

As to national parliaments and subsidiarity, it’s a moot point given
that there’s no effective mechanism for rejecting EU legislation which
is ultra vires the Treaties, let alone EU legislation in areas of
legally legitimate EU competence which happen to violate subsidiarity.

Your point about subsidiarity being too political for judicial
decision is fair enough and I guess I agree.

---

@ Martin Keegan

"I don’t think that judically-enforced subsidiarity can work.  it’s a
vague political concept and you can’t really enforce it through clear
legal rules.  it’s pretty much always a political decision , and it’s
too political for the courts to handle safely."



------------

@Mr Violet

Is it reasonable to suppose that the EU might one day become
acceptably democratic? What grounds would there be for such a
conclusion? Is it reasonable to suppose this might happen within the
next few decades?

The majority of British people want less decision-making to be done at
EU level. If these opinions do not change, would it be democratic to
keep Britain in the EU, under the current or similar terms? Is it
democratic to keep preventing them from having a say on any
constitutional developments since Thatcher’s Single European Act?

It seems to me to be a contradiction in terms to want affairs within
the EU be conducted more in accordance with the wishes of citizens,
when the citizens don’t want affairs to be conducted within the EU in
the first place.

Is it logically consistent to say that it’s Ok for the USA, Ireland,
Scotland, Kenya, South Africa, Cyprus, Israel, Southern Rhodesia, etc
to become independent of the UK, but that it is not Ok for the UK to
be independent of the EU? (I mean, obviously, if one is just an
anti-English racist bigot, it’s intellectually consistent, but is it
intellectually consistent with a sane and reasonable world view?)
