---
layout: layout
title: Questions for Europhiles
---

how much democracy, freedom, rule of law and prosperity is it worth
sacrificing for European integration?

is actual democratic consent to EU-wide governance ever likely to be
obtainable?

is the Single Market, in its current form, or any form it is likely to
assume in the future, actually beneficial for every single member
state?

what is the benefit of restricting the economic policy options such
that countries may follow the policies of Ludwig Erhard, Joe
Chamberlain or Leo XIII, but not those of Ed Balls, Margaret Thatcher,
Eamon de Valera or Paul Keating?

might the acquis communautaire gradually turn the whole Single Market
into a larger version of Italy and hand vetos on fixing this to every
established sectional interest group? Might this have already
happened?

does the EU’s policymaking over intellectual property lead to a
socially optimal outcome, or rent-seeking by established concentrated
producer interests? Is there quantitative theoretical and empirical
research which allows us to reach such a conclusion? Are there
reasonable grounds for thinking this might be a general problem with
Single Market rulemaking, not specific to intellectual property and
copyright term extension?

what are the costs and benefits of Single Market legislative
rulemaking, individually or collectively? Is it even necessary or
beneficial to have standardisation of rules as well as free trade
within the EU (as opposed to politically necessary for participation
by certain member states such as France)? Are the arguments in favour
of the Single Market coherent when considered in the light of the
development of (much younger) WTO system?

how much moral concern should we have for the impact of EU
protectionism on agricultural producers in Africa?

is the institutional setup of the EU part of the problem observed with
policy outcomes?

to what extent has the EU been captured by concetrated producer
interests? Has this had any impact on the EU’s institutional setup?

to what extent does the ECJ actually follow EU laws and treaties? To
what extent has it been captured? Does it bemuse you that it almost
never admits the EU lacks competence vis-a-vis the member states? Does
the EU have dignified and efficient elements to its constitution (to
use Bagehot’s terminology)? Is the efficient constitution of the EU
actually one with no competence constraints whatsoever on EU
legislation? To what extent would such a state of affairs be
desirable, and democratically legitimate?

are the problems of the EU actually logically inseparable from an
attempt to govern without democratic consent? Is there any theoretical
or empirical evidence that government without consent is sustainable
with (in historical terms) an educated and affluent population? Does
the situation allow for much greater corporate rentseeking than real
democracy? Is there some account of human society in which this is
regarded as a good thing?

does the refusal of Europhiles to engage with the issues and admit
that they might have been terribly wrong help prolong the current
state of affairs?
