---
layout: democracy
title: Referendums about the EU
---

Every time someone talks about a referendum on an EU matter, look very
very carefully indeed at precisely what question they're proposing to
ask, and the circumstances in which they're proposing to ask it.

The game with referendums is always to deny the public the right to
choose on any actual relevant question.

Imagine it were proposed that the EU modify its institutional
arrangements in a way which is not supported by the general public in
a particular member state, but that a tiny minority of vicious cranks,
let us call them, say, Europhiles, favour this change. Those few in
favour of the change can propose a referendum about something else,
such as mere membership of the EU.

They do this time and time again. A few previous times are documented
on my blog already.

And here they are, at it again with Greece: you're not allowed to have
a referendum on the bailout package, only on Eurozone membership.

The effect of this is that the people get no say, whatsoever over the
rules that affect their lives. Cui bono?

Legitimacy of refedendums
-------------------------


Leaving the EU and staying in are both unknowns. By default, leaving
the EU means staying in the EEA, EFTA, ECHR and WTO and in NATO so the
UK would continue to be bound by the associated rules. Supporters of
EU withdrawal will be able to conflate the benefits of EU withdrawal
with the benefits of withdrawal from EEA, EFTA, and, sadly, ECHR,
unless there’s a particularly long lead-up to the referendum.

I count myself as someone who thinks the UK should withdraw from the
EU, and indeed that the EU should be abolished, but simultaneously as
someone who supports making the EU more democratic, even if that makes
it harder to withdraw. The EU withdrawalists owe it to the public to
produce the 1000 page document setting out the cost-benefit analysis
of withdrawal, but this is very expensive. It’s not as though EU
conservatives (that is, those who want to remain members) have
produced a comprehensive analysis of the benefits of the status quo,
however, so there is fault on both sides.

We will end up with a snap referendum, like the AV referendum, where
the racist lies on both sides are repeated for a few short weeks and
then the public votes on an undebated proposition. Imagine what it’s
like, coming from a country which uses AV, and being told you’re not a
democracy.

It is nevertheless right to question whether a referendum is the right
mechanism. In countries with sensible constitutions (that is, Ireland,
Australia, Japan and a few others), constitutional change can only be
effected by referendums, so the public are accustomed to being
consulted on constitutional matters, and can rest secure that their
country’s constitution cannot be subverted by a temporary majority
among politicians. In the UK, however, the tradition is to effect
changes to the constitutional relationship with external powers such
as the EU by stealth or deceit: there was no election or referendum
about joining the EU (unlike in newer member states), there was one
referendum about the terms of membership, and no further consultation
about constitutional changes effected by treaty or judicial
malpractice. On the contrary, Brown ratified the Lisbon Treaty having
falsely promised a referendum on its predecessor treaty.

If it’s Ok to lie to the public about whether they’ll get a referendum
on constitutional changes, and Ok to join the EEC without an election
or referendum, it’s Ok to just withdraw without a referendum
either. It’s not like anyone would believe David Cameron’s promise of
a referendum anymore anyway.

I’m sure that some of the Europhiles were delighted by the farce of
the AV referendum, as it will have discredited referendums in general.

The benefit of doing things by referendum is that it counteracts the
ability of the business lobby to capture the political parties to
prevent the withdrawal decision being taken.


Clarification
-------------

To clarify what I meant by staying in the EU being an unknown:

The EU is becoming unstable: the failure of the Euro is undeservedly
going to discredit the EU more generally, as will failures over
immigration. This is for reasons similar to Dani Rodrik’s trilemma of
the world economy: you can have only two of democracy, national
sovereignty and economic integration (though as it happens, I disagree
with him).

The EU has no mechanism to prevent it from acquiring ever-increasing
competences, nor any mechanism for subjecting these to democratic
control. It follows that it is stuck on a collision course with the
right of people to control their own lives, so opposition to it will
increase.

The question is whether an orderly subjection of the EU to democratic
discipline and the rule of law is still possible, or whether it will
break apart chaotically and peacefully like the Soviet Union. We have
a situation where 27 national elites hold vetos on all sorts of
matters, which in a real crisis will prove as paralytic as the old
Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth system of giving every single
aristocrat a veto on everything.

As a proportion of world trade, the EU is declining, so the incentives
to get outside the tariff wall and trade freely with the rest of the
world will only increase. If the UK were to leave, it would be doing
so at a time when other member states would also be considering their
options. There may well be a widespread acceptance that the current
arrangements haven’t worked, and a willingness to be much more
flexible with member states fed up with full EU membership.

I’d be unsurprised if Germany didn’t just lose patience with the EU
one day and abruptly quit, whilst the Brits were still trying to fudge
an evolutionary compromise on their way away from the centre of the
EU.

Of course originally the Government claimed that most of the new
treaty was just a "tidying-up exercise", not important enough to
warrant a referendum, until not having a referendum started to become
a political liability. So if you're a UK voter, you are thus faced, in
the words of Tom Koerner, with proposals "simultaneously so minor that
they are unworthy of your attention and so important that failure to
pass them will lead to unspeakable catastrophe."

But what is interesting and concerning is the presentation of the
evolution of EU treaties as a matter on whose details the electorate
has no voice: "You can vote aye or no to this treaty, but if you vote
no, you'll be kicked out and won't get a chance to vote aye to an
amended proposal incorporating your concerns". You can't vote for any
Europe other than the one on offer, and if you don't, there'll be a
catastrophe.

---------
