---
layout: democracy
title: Is international democracy possible? Or EU democracy?
---

The EU already accommodates “differential geometry”, in
that some countries are not in the Eurozone or Schengen system, and
that it is in the economic interests of the rest of the EU to maximise
British economic involvement.

As a parallel, we should look at another undemocratic international
institution, the ITU. Most ITU member states had government postal /
telephone monopolies, whereas the United States basically did not, and
the US and a few similar countries therefore constituted an awkward
minority. However, the ITU accepted US partial membership on the
grounds that this was better than non-membership as a means of
advancing the ITU’s core objectives of rent-seeking, surveillance and
preventing technological change and competition in the
telecommunications sector.

The EU is not going to turn around and tell Britain to take its
appalling trade deficit somewhere else. If the UK government asked for
minimal EU membership, the other countries would prefer this to UK
withdrawal.

Supra-national democracy can't exist. It’s a
contradiction in terms.

The existence of a demos is a constraint, not a policy. It’s a social
network of people who generally agree that they’re going to govern
themselves. The UK shows that separate countries can both come
together and form a single country (England, Scotland and Ireland),
and that sometimes people want to go off and govern themselves (the
Republic of Ireland).

Over the centuries, Greeks and Germans may gradually come to think of
themselves as Europeans, as Welsh, English and Scottish people largely
came to think of themselves as British; the process can go the other
way too, as people come to believe that being Irish meant being not
British. Whether a particular group of people generally think they’re
part of a group is up to the people themselves; you can’t make people
feel a common bond.

The unchanging “essentialist” conception of what a nation is, favoured
by far too many British Eurosceptics and occasionally Germany’s
judiciary, is wrong. Nations can split and merge. But this is a split
or a merger of a collection of social relationships the members choose
to make between themselves. It is these relationships which mean that
people consent to be governed by other members of the group. I take
“consent” broadly, in a way which would encompass mediaeval feudal
Europe and include adherence to a long tradition of being governed
together, even if not very democratically, which offers some hope for
Europhiles who can accept just leaving the people to grow together
over centuries.

But to be clear: if the people of two nations consent to be governed
as one, then they’re already the same nation; the social network is
merging. Supranational democracy is as unnecessary as it is
impossible.

It is simply untrue to say that the current population of the EU
generally want to be governed as a single polity. In the UK there’s
majority support for reducing the powers already exercised at
EU-level. The EU constitution in practice already goes vastly beyond
what people anywhere in the EU would consent to, with the exception of
a statistically insignificant extremist Europhile minority.

So, if we give the words their conventional acceptation, the only way
there’ll be a democratic Europe is if the generality of the public
want it.

Criticically though, the rational constructivists have, without the
consent of the peoples of Europe, created a constitutional system for
the EU in which responsibilities are gradually and unilaterally
transferred to the EU by the Luxembourg Court, but the democratic
institutions to constrain the exercise of those powers can only be
established very gradually and require a consent that may take
centuries to evolve.

The more that power is exercised by the EU, the more it affects
people’s lives and the more they’ll try to have their say.

The smart Europhile would prioritise measures to prevent this
situation getting any worse. The European Court of Justice is a sham
and may be beyond reform, but that’s where the smart Europhile should
focus.