---
layout: post
title: How much ratification is enough these days?
---

Later this year there will be another referendum in the Republic of
Ireland about the Lisbon Treaty. The previous one was defeated so the
executive branch of the government has negotiated a set of
arrangements with other EU member state governments' executive
branches. Whereas polling suggests that public has changed its mind on
the Lisbon Treaty for reasons other than these measures, assuming that
it *were* these arrangements which will persuade people to vote
differently, how will they make such a difference in practice as to
persuade people to vote differently?

The EU exercises powers conferred on it by member states. These powers
and the procedures for their exercise are defined in treaties between
the member states. Each state has provision for the EU law enacted via
these conferred powers to have effect in its legal system. Often EU
law will differ from what a member state would enact left to its own
devices: there'd be no point having the EU if the outcome of its
legislative processes were identical to what member states would
otherwise do. As the EU's processes are less democratic than the
member states, there is a systematic bias in EU law towards
inefficient regulation and the favouring of special interests.

The Irish are concerned about abortion, tax and defence neutrality;
the constitution was amended by referendum in 1983 to ban abortion,
and this has conflicted with the fundamental EU free trade rules: in
the 1990s the Gardai interned a 14 year old rape victim to stop her
travelling to Britain, where abortion is a *inter alia* service
provided for profit, for what in Ireland is regarded primarily as a
moral issue; EU law would have had to have favoured the British
medical industry or the Irish electorate.

The previous solution was to add a protocol to the Maastricht Treaty
purporting to exempt Ireland's abortion policies from the general
rules about free movement. All solutions have to look something like
this. The options are either

1) to prevent the EU from having a particular power conferred upon it
2) conditioning the exercise of powers on the consent of the Irish
government
3) or to obtain a derogation such that the powers are not
exercised against the Republic of Ireland


(which is what they opted for last time). In practice option 2,
obtaining a veto, is no good unless one may trust the government not
to horse-trade the exercise of the veto for some other policy.

To make a difference, any new compromise measures for the Lisbon
Treaty need to be respected by Irish courts when interpreting EU law.
Conventionally, EU law has meant "the EU treaties in force as a result
of ratification according to the procedures of each member state, plus
the much larger body of laws made via processes defined in those
treaties". If the Republic of Ireland is to have an *effective*
opt-out or guarantee, somehow that needs to be included in the
*treaties*, but treaties require ratification. The Lisbon Treaty
stands ratified in the generality of EU member states, and in member
states such as the UK, this ratification was in the teeth of public
opposition and manifesto commitments to predicate ratification on
approval at referendum.

Should the Republic ratify the Lisbon treaty once a protocol with its
guarantees is added, other countries' interest groups might demand
similar concessions, re-opening the debate on ratification of the
original treaty. How "ratified" does such a protocol need to be for it
to have effect in the Irish legal system? Does each member state need
to go through its ratification procedure again in relation to the
protocol (or the treaty plus the protocol)? If the guarantees in the
protocol can become effective without unanimous ratification, why is
that necessary for the treaty itself?

This blog post was occasioned by a curious <a
href="http://www.irishtimes.com/newspaper/frontpage/2009/0611/1224248613128.html">report</a>
on the front page of Thursday's Irish Times, which stated "One
alternative that member states may offer the [Irish] Government is a
legal decision on the guarantees issued by the European Council. This
would have legal standing but would enshrine the guarantees in the EU
treaties *(sic)*." It's not clear whether there's supposed to be a
"not" in either clause of the second sentence. What on earth is going
on here? The European Council is effectively the prime ministers and
presidents of the EU member states. Has it suddenly become a
legislative/judicial body?

I *think* what is being proposed here is a formal agreement similar to
the Luxembourg Accord whereby de Gaulle obtained a veto on all EEC
legislation exercisable by any member state's executive. This was
*never* justiciable and was done away with by Thatcher when it proved
a bulwark against market liberalisation. It isn't, or at least
*shouldn't be* something you can argue before the courts, so wouldn't
override any EU law adversely affecting Ireland's position on taxation
or abortion *et c*.

But if it *were* justiciable, would this not constitute an alternative
to treaty ratification? Should not member states be concerned that
elaborate treaty ratification procedures can be supplanted by the
say-so of the head of government, even to the extent of overriding
provisions of the national constitution? Can one really envision the
Bundesverfassungsgericht permitting the rights of Germans to turn on
an agreement between the heads of the *executive* branches of foreign
governments? Against the national constitution? When those governments
might depend on extremists for their majorities?

<hr />

I should note that I make no apologies for the cumbersome wording of
sentences above, as the common synecdoche conflating a country
("Republic of Ireland"), its government as a whole ("the Irish
government") and those who negotiate on its behalf ("the executive
branch of the government") is particularly apt to mislead when EU
negotiations are taking place: the executive branch *routinely* uses
its monopoly over external negotiations to usurp the r&ocirc;le of the
legislative branch.

<hr />

The actual reason the Irish have changed their minds is the economic
downturn: somehow it is felt that either the Lisbon Treaty's
ratification will be of economic benefit, or will lead to more
sympathy and generosity from other EU member states.